Encounter: Gargoyle Chasm
The passage leads to a subterranean chasm spanned by a zigzagging, ten-foot-wide stone bridge without railings. The bridge links tunnels leading north and south. The chasm floor is fifty feet below the bridge and consists of a jumbled mass of boulders. To the west, the chasm narrows and continues for some distance.

Encounter: Three gargoyles guard the area, lurking in the upper reaches of the cavern. Characters with darkvision spot them with {Perception} 15 or higher.
  - They attack strangers unless they give the hand signal of the cult.
  - They look for opportunities to push charactesr off the bridge
  - If two are defeated, the third retreats to area B2 to hdie

Encounter: North Chasm
The floor of this large cavern is a broken jumble of stone, with steep walls slanting up to a ceiling of hanging stalactites perhaps a hundred feet above. Fifty feet up the jagged walls are two openings: a wider opening to the southwest and a narrow tunnel leading southeast.

Encounter: Ruined Gates
A massive pair of stone doors lies broken just south of this small plaza, flanking by iron torches that brightly illuminate the area. One door lists unevenly on its bottom hinge, and the other lies shattered on the ground. The standing door is carved with a pastoral scene of grain fields and rolling hills, worn and pitted by the centuries. A large, dimly lit hall waits beyond the broken gates. Arrow slits are carved into the west and east walls.

Encounter: Arrow Slits. Any loud commotion around the gate might attract the attention of cultists in the other areas, who will begin shooting through these slits.

Encounter: Hall of the Gate
This was once a magnificent hall with a soaring ceiling, marble floors, and intricate carvings of prosperous farmlands decorating the walls. It has since fallen to ruin. Deep cracks mar the walls, sections of the masonry have collapsed, and the huge stone doors at the north end of the hall are broken. Passages lead west and south, and there is a stone door to the east. A small cooking fire and several bedrolls are in the southeast corner of the room.

Encounter: Nartham
Four hobgoblins, a burrowshark named Nartham (see chapter 7), and Nartham’s bulette mount guard the Hall of the Gate. Nartham is a violent, short-tempered fellow. If the characters attempt to talk their way into the temple, they need to talk fast, because Nartham craves an excuse to kill.

Encounter: Reinforcements
The duergar in area B5 and the cultists in area B7 hear any battle in this room. However, they are used to Nartham’s bulette making noise, so it takes a while before they become curious about any racket. The duergar use crossbows (see area B5) while the cultists in B7 come to aid the forces here.

Encounter: East Guardroom
The crumbling masonry in this old guardroom illustrates the great age of this dungeon. To the north, a long gallery leads to an arrow slit in the western wall. To the south, piles of rubble choke a small inner chamber. Haifa dozen plain bedrolls and an iron stove furnish the room. A pile of firewood nearby keeps the stove well stoked.

Encounter: Duergar
This guardroom serves as the barracks and post of five duergar in the service of the Black Earth cult. If alerted by serious fighting or unusual activity outside, two duergar take light crossbows (+2 to hit, 1d8 piercing damage) and post themselves at the arrow slits. The other two prepare to defend the room’s only entrance.

Encounter: Yarsha's Burrow
A large pile of rubble from a partially collapsed wall fills the southeast corner of this guardroom, while a narrow fissure mars the wall to the north. Despite these failings, the room serves as a barracks and guardroom. Four plain wooden bunks are arrayed around the room, each with a small footlocker. At the back of an alcove in the northeast wall is an arrow slit.

Encounter: Yarsha
A Stonemelder named Yarsha and her two Black Earth guards (see chapter 7 for both) dwell here. In addition to normal gear, Yarsha carries a potion of greater healing, and the guards have light crossbows.

Treasure:
An iron coffer under Yarsha’s bunk contains 210 sp, 140 ep, a pouch with six obsidian flakes worth 10 gp each, and a potion of water breathing.

Encounter: Gatewarden's Quarters
This large suite consists of several small rooms linked by low archways. Brown curtains offer some amount of privacy for the different rooms, and martial displays cover the walls--shields and crossed swords, tattered banners, and a few mounted monster heads, including those of a peryton and a manticore.

Encounter: Dynath
A burrowshark named Dynath, a Black Earth guard, and four cultists occupy the room. The cultists keep odd hours, and at any given time 1d4 are sacked out in their bunks. At least two of the residents are awake even in the middle of the night. They assume that random strangers that blunder in unannounced are enemies and attack. If circumstances permit, the occupants of the room spread the alarm by alerting the cultists in area B4 to the attack.

Treasure:
Dynath wears a hidden purse underneath his armor containing 15 gp, 5 pp, and five fine citrines worth 40 gp each.

Encounter: Mud Sorcerer's Lab
Large stone statues carved to look like scowling dwarf warriors line the walls of this large chamber. Each statue has spiky maces in place of hands. However, several of the statues are melted or deformed. The flagstones in the middle of the room have been removed to reveal a surface of natural rock. Several worktables and shelves full of alchemical reagents are tucked up against the walls between the statues.

Encounter: Miraj Vizann
Miraj is rational, deliberate, and slow to anger. He supports the cult because it deepens his understanding of elemental magic. If challenged, he attempts to persuade his attackers to turn their efforts against the fire cult. Miraj isn’t above offering a bribe to entice enemies, then reneging on the deal if they come back to collect.

In battle, Miraj commands the golem to defend him. He then retreats to the back of the room to cast spells. Miraj turns invisible and flees if death seems imminent.

Treasure:
A wooden chest stowed under one of the worktables holds a small hoard of 220 gp, nine strange black crystals worth 50 gp each, and a potion of water breathing.

Encounter: Broken Hall
Some long-ago, a seismic event devastated this great hall. A deep chasm splits the chamber in two, leaving a wide gap between the room’s northern and southern halves. Freestanding pillars of rock to the east create natural “stepping stones” across the chasm. The chasm continues beyond the west wall, and a narrow ledge hugs the south wall of the expanse. Six huge stone pillars still stand in this chamber, and the ceiling here is almost fifty feet high. Each of the pillars anchors heavy iron chains with links as big as a warrior’s hand.

Encounter: Bulette Stable
The Cult of the Black Earth now uses the room as a stable for their prized mounts: three bulettes. One belongs to Dynath in area B7. The other two were recently caught and haven’t yet been broken. The bulettes are being held here until the monsters can be bonded with cultists.
Each bulette is chained securely to one of the big pillars in the room. The chains keep the bulettes within 15 feet of the pillars, but they can move freely otherwise. The bulettes spend most of their time dozing, but they are light sleepers. A bulette can break its chain with a successful DC 20 Strength check, but the chain to the northeast (holding the trained bulette) is weaker, requiring only a successful DC 15 Strength check to break.

Encounter: Chasm
The chasm that bisects the room is 100 feet deep and ranges in width from 15 feet (at the far east end) to 30 feet. The pillars of rock at the east end of the chasm are flat on top, and the gaps between them are 5 feet wide.

Encounter: Long Chasm
This long chasm stretches northwest to southeast. A five-foot-wide ledge clings to one wall, then forms a narrow stone bridge that spans the chasm and connects to a similar ledge that runs along the opposite wall.

Encounter: Bats
Creatures that make a lot of noise in the vicinity of the natural bridge disturb a swarm of bats roosting on the bridge’s underside.

Encounter: South Passage
This hallway leads south to area C10 of the Temple of the Crushing Wave.

Encounter: Broog-Norb's Lair
Crumbling masonry, huge uncured pelts, and heaps of picked-over bones and refuse fill this large room. It looks like it used to be a kitchen or bakery: huge ancient brick ovens stand in the middle of the chamber, although most are crumbling heaps of red rubble now.

Encounter: Broog-Norb
It is now the lair of Broog and Norb—the two heads of a particularly large and grumpy ettin. Broog-Norb has 130 hit points. Broog-Norb isn’t a follower of the Cult of the Black Earth. He found a way down into the ruins of Tyar-Besil months ago. The ettin has a tenuous truce with the earth cultists, who are careful to stay out of his way.

He attacks intruders who make it clear that they aren’t part of the earth cult, but only threatens intruders who present themselves as cult members. Broog-Norb has no idea who is a cultist and who isn’t.

Treasure
The ettin’s treasure lies in an untidy heap covered with a filthy pelt. The pile contains 2,900 cp, 130 ep, an ivory statuette of an elephant worth 80 gp, and a pair of gold bracelets worth 30 gp each.

Encounter: Hunting Hall
Water fills a rectangular marble basin in the middle of this hall, and the walls display an ancient frieze that circles the room. The frieze depicts woodland images of deer, bears, and game fowl, along with parties of dwarven hunters. The southeast corner of the room is badly damaged, and the walls there are little more than rubble.

Encounter: Torture Chamber
A wooden torture rack stands in the middle of this room. Manacles hang from the walls and fiendish hooks, blades, and clamps hang on the back wall. Four cramped iron cages stand in the room’s western alcove, occupied by gaunt, dirty humans with blank gazes. In the room’s eastern alcove stand two double bunks and an iron stove.

Encounter: Heldorm
This grim chamber is the domain of a Stonemelder named Heldorm and the three cultists who assist him. Unbalanced, Heldorm goes about his work while arguing with himself and tittering at a series of black jests he only partially shares aloud. If the characters pass themselves off as Black Earth cultists, he assumes they brought him a new victim, and asks, “Who is to be questioned?” He is very excited by the prospect of interrogating a new subject.

Encounter: Prisoners
The captives locked in the cages include the following: Orna, Droth, Wulgrda, Gervor

Treasure
Hedorm keeps the best pickings from the prisoners in a locked wooden chest (the key is in his pocket). His trove includes 230 sp, a pouch of six azurites worth 10 gp each, Orna’s plate armor, Gervor’s studded leather armor and longsword, and a wand of magic missiles (fully charged) left behind by a previous victim.

Encounter: Stone Forge
Characters approaching this area hear the ringing of hammers on anvils before they enter. A forge stands in the middle of this room, surrounded by piles of firewood. Two big anvils stand close by, and hammers, tongs, and other smithing tools are scattered around several workbenches along the chamber’s walls. There are doorways to the west and the south, but the eastern end of the room opens up onto a dark chasm.

Encounter: Xharver Deem
The master of the forge is a dao named Xharva Deem. Two duergar assist her. Xharva Deem has no interest in fighting, because her bargain with Marlos Urnrayle requires her to make implements of elemental power for the cult. That is the extent of her promise. If the characters ask why she is standing aside, she answers, “Urnrayle has not paid me to fight puny mortals. He can look after his own slaves.

She doesn’t defend her duergar assistants, although she fights back with indignant fury if any mortal dares to attack her. Xharva Deem also intervenes if characters attempt to vandalize her forge, take her tools, or remove objects she is working on, although she issues a sharply worded warning first.

Treasure
Xharva Deem is well paid indeed. Two iron coffers by her forge contain a total of 600 gp, two gold bracelets worth 100 gp each, a gold necklace with a ruby pendant worth 750 gp, and a bag with a dozen malachites worth 25 gp each. In addition, the dao has completed one set of claws of the umber hulk for the cult (see chapter 7). The claws sit on a singed square of leather on one of the workbenches.

Encounter: Armory
A single thick pillar supports the low, barrel-vaulted ceiling of this unlit chamber. Rusted scraps of metal—the remnants of breastplates, shields, axes, and swords—hang from the walls on old pegs, or lie on the floor where they fell long ago. More recent clutter in the form of filthy furs and splintered wooden furniture also lies scattered about the room. A pile of broken chairs and table legs lies next to a smoky fire pit on the north side of the room. Doors lead to the east and the southwest.

Encounter: Ogres
To guard this point of access, Marlos Urnrayle has assigned a garrison of five ogres with orders to
let no one enter from the west without giving the pass sign of the earth cult (a triangle formed by thumbs and forefingers). The ogres have no orders to prevent people from leaving, although they challenge strangers who don’t look like members of the cult.

Encounter: Chasm Staircase
A great chasm opens before you, its ceiling thirty feet overhead. In the middle of the chasm is a square pillar of black rock. A stone bridge leads to a staircase that wraps around this pillar. The chasm, the staircase, and the pillar descend into darkness.

Encounter: Alarm
An alarm spell has been cast on the middle of the bridge. When you reach the middle of the bridge, you feel a slight tremor underfoot. Then a loud, low-pitched tone like the groaning of a giant fills the air, reverberating within the chasm. The alarm alerts cultists in area B18, who awaken, arm themselves, and move to watch for new arrivals.

Encounter: Barracks
This room appears to be a clean, neatly organized bunkroom. The sparse furnishings include six double­bunks arranged against the south and east walls, and a wooden table with several chairs in the north half of the room. An iron stove with a tidy pile of firewood stands near the middle of the room. In the southwest corner, an arrow-slit looks out at a dark passageway. Doors lead to the east and west.

Encounter: Cultists
A dozen Black Earth cultists are quartered here, but only four Black Earth guards and a Black Earth priest (see chapter 7 for both) are present at any given time. Two guards are sleeping and unarmored; they have AC 10 and won’t have time to don their armor if an alarm is raised.

Encounter: Statue of Ogremoch
Three hallways meet at this room. An alcove in the middle of the west wall holds a ten-foot-tall statue depicting a crude humanoid form composed of earth, boulders, and sharp crystals. One massive, rocky fist is raised above its blunt head.Shattered rubble from an older statue lies heaped around the pedestal on which this figure stands.

Encounter: Mess Hall
Three trestle tables are arranged in the middle of this room, and crates of provisions are stacked neatly against the walls. To the southeast, an open doorway leads to a small kitchen containing more provisions and a large cooking-hearth. A tattered gray cloak with feathers is nailed to the middle of the north wall. Doors lead to the east, west, and south.

Encounter: Eating Guards
Two Black Earth guards currently eat at the middle table, while three cultists work in the kitchen.

Encounter: Screaming Statues
This cavern has formations of flowstone, stalagmites, and stalactites everywhere. A stone building is anchored in the north wall, and a stone door stands in a masonry wall to the south. A natural gap in the cavern wall to the east reveals a chasm beyond. Numerous lifelike statues have been arranged among the rock formations. The statues depict creatures in poses suggesting shock, fear, or agony.

Encounter: Marlos Urnrayle
Marlos Urnrayle is here. Visions have warned the medusa of the characters’ arrival, and he prefers to meet visitors in this area. A shadow demon that serves as Marlos’s messenger and majordomo lurks nearby.

An unrelenting narcissist, Marlos loves talking about himself. If they forget they’re talking to a medusa and take a good look at him, he is happy to make a permanent record of their astonishment. Marlos enjoys fine things and showing off. He gloats about how he has discovered power to shake the foundations of the earth. Very soon, he intends to pay back everyone who ever defied or insulted him. In combat, Marlos relies on his petrifying gaze to keep him safe from ranged attacks or spells, as he closes in to use Ironfang and his snaky hair. When the battle turns against him, Marlos flees to area B23 and makes his getaway through the hidden path in area B2.

Treasure
Marlos carries Ironfang

Encounter: Earth Prophet's Sanctum
This sumptuously appointed chamber features tapestries of gold and brown, a huge bed covered in pillows, fine mahogany furniture with crimson cushions, and lovely art objects including sculptures, busts, and urns. An arrow slit faces toward a chasm to the east.

Marlos has carefully prepared the alcove with the arrow slit to function as a means of escape. The arrow slit is 4 feet high, 6 inches wide, and 1 foot deep. One use of his Earth Passage feature is sufficient to pass through. Just outside is a narrow ledge

Treasure
In the urns, Marlos has stored 1,100 sp and 130 pp. Within the room are a beautiful tapestry of a flying dragon (worth 400 gp), a carved lyre worth 250 gp, and an embroidered silk robe worth 80 gp. A suit of elven chain is folded inside a wooden chest.

Encounter: Shrine of Bleeding Stone
An irregular pit fills the center of this large hall. In the middle ofthe pit stands an obelisk of glistening black stone. Bleached bones lie scattered near the foot of the
obelisk.A smaller stone post in front of the obelisk holds  a pair of manacles, which now confine a strange gnome with gray skin and a bald head.

Encounter: Erione and Rukh
A Black Earth priest named Erione is establishing a shrine here atop the wreckage of an ancient dwarven chapel. She is joined by four cultists. Erione resents the fact that few priests hold high places in the cult, and she intends to demonstrate that worship can bring even greater power. She has coaxed a black pudding into the porous rock obelisk. It seeps forth on her command.

Erione has manacled a female deep gnome named Rukhelmoth “Rukh” Glitterstone to the stone post at the foot of the obelisk and intends to offer him as a sacrifice to the black pudding. When the pudding emerges, it seeps out of the obelisk like thick black blood and attacks the gnome first. Only after the gnome has been consumed does it pay attention to the characters.

Encounter: Sentinel's Hall
Four massive, square columns support the ceiling of this ancient hall. Passages lead out to the northwest and southeast. In the middle of the hall stands the ten-foot statue of a stern dwarf warrior with spiked balls instead of hands.

The statue is a stone golem reactivated by Miraj Vizann and placed here. The stone golem responds only to attacks and creatures entering the hall from the west. If intruders make a triangular handsign by touching thumbs and forefingers, or if they speak the pass phrase “I serve the Black Earth,” the golem allows them to continue. Otherwise, it attacks.
